# ```CViewer: A Java-based integrated analysis toolkit for whole-genome shotgun metagenomics and other meta’omics technologies```
```diff
- Please note that the repository for this project is still under construction!
```

## Introduction to CViewer
The past few years have seen an increased utility of shotgun metagenomics for microbial community surveys over traditional amplicon sequencing. This is made possible by the technological advancement in methods development that enables us now to assemble short sequence reads into longer contiguous regions that can be binned together to identify species they are part of (e.g., through CONCOCT software), and their coding regions can further be annotated against public databases to give an assessment of functional diversity. At the same time, integrated solutions are gaining importance through complementing meta’omics technologies. To consolidate all these realisations on the same sample space, and to fully delineate microbial activity response to environmental factors, it is necessary to include and integrate all levels of gene products, mRNA, protein, metabolites, as well as their interactions in a single platform. Hence, we introduce CViewer, a Java-based software, that integrates with output data from CONCOCT as well as major third party taxonomic and annotation software. The software provides a comprehensive set of multivariate statistical algorithms using the theoretical underpinning of numerical ecology to allow exploratory as well as hypothesis driven analyses. The end result is a highly interactive toolkit with multiple document interface, that makes it easier to unravel useful patterns through Point-and-Click tools whether it is looking at annotated tracks of metagenomic contigs, or exploring enrichments of metabolic pathways and microbial species. 


## Alpha diversity
CViewer allows alpha diversity analyses and considers a number of popular indices that can be used to interrogate the input datasets. We have considered the Shannon's (H'), Simpson’s diversity (D1) and its inverse (D2) which account for species richness and abundance. To measure how similar the distributions of species in a community are to each other, the tool provides the Pielou’s evenness. Finally, the relative proportions of the most dominant taxa for a given community dataset can also be explored.

## Differential abundance
Differential expression analysis can be valuable when investigating for features (e.g. species/metabolic pathways) that discriminate between multiple treatment groups. CViewer implements the Kruskal-Wallis H statistic150 for differential analysis and offers a Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple comparisons. In addition, pairwise significances between the groups can be explored with the Dunn’s post hoc procedure. The hypotheses to be tested can be uploaded in the software in the form of a .csv file containing hypotheses as headers along with additional metadata on the samples describing the treatment groups. One can then easily navigate through the list of available hypotheses and choose the one to be tested with the Kruskal-Wallis statistic. Finally, significant features are visualized in the form of box plots with appropriate colouring to indicate the treatment groups along with P-values to report significance.

## Phylogenetic diversity
In CViewer, we have considered two  metrics which have been been suggested by Webb (2000) and proved useful for phylogenetic structure analysis, as a measure of phylogenetic clustering or overdispersion, namely the Net Relatedness Index (NRI) and Nearest Taxon Index (NTI). The details of each index are described below. The first focuses on overall clustering, while the latter is more sensitive for capturing the clustering or overdispersion around the tips of the phylogenetic tree. Both metrics become positive as clustering increases and negative with overdispersion. More specifically, if the value for NRI or NTI is found to be greater or equal to +2.0, or less or equal to -2.0, (i.e., 2 standard deviations from the null expectation), then the community is more phylogenetically clustered, or more phylogenetic over-dispersed respectively, than expected by chance.
